---
author: Thinking Out Loud
author_tag: ajdecon
blog_subtitle: works in progress and scattered thoughts, often about computers
blog_title: Computing – thinking out loud
blog_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org
category: ajdecon
date: '2025-12-30 03:33:15'
layout: post
original_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org/2025/12/30/why-generic-software-design-advice-is-often-useless/
slug: why-generic-software-design-advice-is-often-useless
title: Why generic software design advice is often useless
---

<p>In <em><a href="https://www.seangoedecke.com/you-cant-design-software-you-dont-work-on/">You can&#8217;t design software you don&#8217;t work on</a>, </em>Sean Goedecke discusses why generic advice on the design of software systems is often unhelpful.</p>




<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p><strong>When you’re doing real work, concrete factors dominate generic factors</strong>. Having a clear understanding of what the code looks like right now is far, far more important than having a good grasp on general design patterns or principles.</p>

</blockquote>



<p>This tracks with my experience not just of software systems, but also systems with a hardware component (eg ML training clusters) or a facility component (eg datacenters). The specifics of your system absolutely dominate any general design guidance.</p>




<p>As the manager of a team that publishes reference architectures, I do think that it’s helpful to clearly understand where your specific design differs from generic advice. If you’re going off the beaten path, you should k<em>now </em>you’re doing that! And be able to plan for any additional validation involved in doing that.</p>




<p>But relatedly, this is part of why I think that any generic advice should be based on some actually existing system. If you are telling someone they should follow a given principle, you should be able to point to an implementation that <em>does</em> follow that principle. </p>




<p>Or else you’re just speculating into the void. Which admittedly can be <em>fun</em> but is not nearly as valuable as speaking from experience.</p>