---
author: Thinking Out Loud
author_tag: ajdecon
blog_subtitle: works in progress and scattered thoughts, often about computers
blog_title: Computing – thinking out loud
blog_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org
category: ajdecon
date: '2025-12-28 19:50:27'
layout: post
original_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org/2025/12/28/large-software-systems/
slug: large-software-systems
title: Large software systems
---

<p>In <em><a href="https://seangoedecke.com/nobody-knows-how-software-products-work/">Nobody understands how large software products work</a></em>, Sean Goedecke makes a number of good points about how difficult it is to really grasp large software systems.</p>




<p>In particular, some features impact every part of the system in unforeseen ways:</p>




<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>Why are these features complicated? Because&nbsp;<strong>they affect every single other feature you build</strong>. If you add organizations and policy controls, you must build a policy control for every new feature you add. If you localize your product, you must include translations for every new feature. And so on. Eventually you’re in a position where you’re trying to figure out whether a self-hosted enterprise customer in the EU is entitled to access a particular feature, and&nbsp;<em>nobody knows</em>&nbsp;&#8211; you have to go and read through the code or do some experimenting to figure it out.</p>

</blockquote>



<p>Sean also points out that eventually the code itself has to be the source of truth, and debugging requires deep investigation of the continually-changing system.</p>




<p>I’ve seen this happen in a bunch of different orgs, and it does seem to be true, especially for products with a large number of collaborating teams. I would add that in addition to the code itself, you often need to have conversations with the relevant teams to discern intent and history. Documentation only goes so far, eventually you need talk to people.</p>