---
author: Thinking Out Loud
author_tag: ajdecon
blog_subtitle: works in progress and scattered thoughts, often about computers
blog_title: Computing – thinking out loud
blog_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org
category: ajdecon
date: '2026-01-19 17:47:51'
layout: post
original_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org/2026/01/19/quoting-charity-majors/
slug: quoting-charity-majors
title: Quoting Charity Majors
---

<p>Charity’s latest post, <em><a href="https://charity.wtf/2026/01/19/bring-back-ops-pride-xpost/">Bring back ops pride</a></em>, is an excellent discussion (rant?) on the importance of operations for software systems and why it’s a bad idea to try and pretend it isn’t a real concern, or make conventional application teams do the work in addition to their regular job.</p>




<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>“Operations” is not a dirty word, a synonym for toil, or a title for people who can’t write code. May those who shit on ops get the operational outcomes they deserve.</p>

</blockquote>



<p>You should absolutely go read the <a href="https://charity.wtf/2026/01/19/bring-back-ops-pride-xpost/">full piece</a>, as well as Charity’s earlier post on the Honeycomb blog: <em><a href="https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/you-had-one-job-why-twenty-years-of-devops-has-failed-to-do-it">You had one job: Why twenty years of DevOps has failed to do it</a></em>. </p>




<p>Below find several pull quotes from the post itself, because there were just too many to choose from.</p>




<span id="more-430"></span>



<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>The difference between “dev” and “ops” is not about whether or not you can write code. Dude, it’s 2026:&nbsp;<strong>everyone writes software</strong>.</p>




<p>The difference between dev and ops is a separation of concerns.</p>

</blockquote>



<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>The hardest technical challenges and the long, stubborn tail of intractable problems have&nbsp;<em>always</em>&nbsp;been on the infrastructure side.&nbsp;<strong>That’s why we work&nbsp;<em>so hard</em>&nbsp;to try not to have them</strong>—to solve them by partnerships, cloud computing, open source, etc.&nbsp;<em>Anything</em>&nbsp;is better than trying to build them again, starting over from scratch. We know the cost of new code in our bones.</p>




<p>As I have said a thousand times: the closer you get to laying bits down on disk, the more conservative (and afraid) you should be.</p>

</blockquote>



<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>The difference between dev and ops isn’t about writing code or not. But there&nbsp;<em>are</em>&nbsp;differences. In perspective, priorities, and (often) temperament.</p>




<p>I touched on a number of these in&nbsp;<a href="https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/you-had-one-job-why-twenty-years-of-devops-has-failed-to-do-it">the article I just wrote on feedback loops</a>, so I’m not going to repeat myself here.</p>




<p>The biggest difference I did&nbsp;<em>not</em>&nbsp;mention is that they have different relationships with resources and definitions of success.</p>




<p>Infrastructure is a cost center. You aren’t going to make more money if you give ten laptops to everyone in your company, and you aren’t going to make more money by over-spending on infrastructure, either. Great operations engineers and architects never forget that&nbsp;<strong>cost is a first class citizen</strong>&nbsp;of their engineering decisions.</p>

</blockquote>



<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>Operational rigor and excellence are not, how shall I say this…not yet something you can take for granted in the tech industry. The most striking thing about the 2025 DORA report was that the&nbsp;<em>majority of companies</em>&nbsp;report that AI is just adding more chaos to a system already defined by chaos. In other words, most companies are bad at ops.</p>

</blockquote>