---
author: Thinking Out Loud
author_tag: ajdecon
blog_subtitle: works in progress and scattered thoughts, often about computers
blog_title: Computing – thinking out loud
blog_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org
category: ajdecon
date: '2026-01-05 04:04:31'
layout: post
original_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org/2026/01/05/my-cousin-vinny-as-an-llm-benchmark/
slug: -my-cousin-vinny-as-an-llm-benchmark
title: “My Cousin Vinny” as an LLM benchmark
---

<p>Mike Caulfield wrote a <a href="https://mikecaulfield.substack.com/p/notes-towards-a-narrative-llm-benchmark">very thorough and quite entertaining article</a> about posing the following question to ChatGPT:</p>




<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>What were Marisa Tomei’s most famous quotes from My Cousin Vinny and what was the context?</p>

</blockquote>



<p>Depending on the model selected, the answers to this varied from hilariously wrong, to plausible-but-flawed, to accurate. </p>




<p>Interestingly, substantial test-time compute (“thinking time”) seems to be necessary to do a good job here, despite the easy availability online of famous quotes, plot summaries, and even the script. While the fast-response models available for free were prone to hallucinate. </p>




<blockquote class="wp-block-quote is-layout-flow wp-block-quote-is-layout-flow">
<p>At the same time I was struck just how&nbsp;<em>much</em> reasoning time needed to be expended to get this task right. It’s possible that&nbsp;<em>My Cousin Vinny</em>&nbsp;is uniquely hard to parse, but I don’t think that is the case. I’ve tried this with a half dozen other films and the pattern seems to hold. If it’s true that a significant amount of similar film contextualization tasks are solvable with test-time compute but require extensive compute to get it right, it seems to me this could be the basis of a number of useful benchmarks.</p>

</blockquote>



<p>The <a href="https://mikecaulfield.substack.com/p/notes-towards-a-narrative-llm-benchmark">full article</a> is well-worth reading, and not only because it discusses <em>My Cousin Vinny</em> in substantial detail (great movie).</p>