pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "About the hpc.social Community Blog"
permalink: /about/
---

The hpc.social community blog aims to share ideas, news, and stories from diverse people, centers and groups across the High Performance Computing (HPC) community.
Whether you are an advanced practitioner, a developer that touches HPC, or a novice, your voice is welcome here. This community blog reflects exactly that - a syndicated feed of our community voices. It's one places that you can subscribe to via a variety of channels (below) and also <a href="https://github.com/hpc-social/blog" target="_blank">follow instructions to contribute your own feed</a>.

<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/feed.xml" target="_blank"><button class="btn">rss</button></a>
<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/atom.xml" target="_blank"><button class="btn">atom</button></a>
<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/feed.json" target="_blank"><button class="btn">json</button></a>

As a word of caution, we curate authors at the point of adding the blog, but do not regularly curate individual posts that are added nightly via automation. The opinions expressed here are owned by the authors and do not reflect the opinion of the hpc.social community at large. Offensive or inappropriate posts should be reported to [info@hpc.social](mailto:info@hpc.social) if you wish to report anonymously. You can also submit a pull request to remove the offending feed if you are comfortable doing so publicly.

Commit message:

creating new scoped personal blog space
Signed-off-by: vsoch <vsoch@users.noreply.github.com>

pages/about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "About the hpc.social Community Blog"
permalink: /about/
---

This belongs in the hpc.social family of blogs. In particular, this is an aggregated feed of personal posts that meet the following criteria:

> The personal blogs aggregator is the "soul" of the HPC community - HPCers who are personally invested in the minutiae of the work they are doing, the projects they are working on with some content about their culture and pet pictures :D - things that we all find in common and share and talk about.

The hpc.social blogs aims to share ideas, news, and stories from diverse people, centers and groups across the High Performance Computing (HPC) community.
Whether you are an advanced practitioner, a developer that touches HPC, or a novice, your voice is welcome here. This community blog reflects exactly that - a syndicated feed of our community voices. It's one places that you can subscribe to via a variety of channels (below) and also <a href="https://github.com/hpc-social/personal-blog" target="_blank">follow instructions to contribute your own feed</a>.

<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/feed.xml" target="_blank"><button class="btn">rss</button></a>
<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/atom.xml" target="_blank"><button class="btn">atom</button></a>
<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/feed.json" target="_blank"><button class="btn">json</button></a>

As a word of caution, we curate authors at the point of adding the blog, but do not regularly curate individual posts that are added nightly via automation. The opinions expressed here are owned by the authors and do not reflect the opinion of the hpc.social community at large. Offensive or inappropriate posts should be reported to [info@hpc.social](mailto:info@hpc.social) if you wish to report anonymously. You can also submit a pull request to remove the offending feed if you are comfortable doing so publicly.
